---
layout: blog-post
title:  "A New Site"
date:   2014-01-01 09:33:00
categories: blog 2014 01
---

A little while ago, I set out to redesign the Java Brains website. Here are some things that have changed. And why.

When I uploaded my first video on YouTube on April 28th, 2011, I had planned out about five or six videos about servlets which was all I was going to do. For starters. Why servlets? I have no idea! But the idea was to  put those videos out there, *just in case it might help someone*.

A lot of things have changed since then in my personal and professional life, but when I make a tutorial today, I still think the same thing. *Just in case it might help someone*. Of course, all the amazing comments and thanks that I've received from you all over the years have strengthened the belief. *It probably does!* 

I would be lying if I said that this effort is entirely selfless. Making these tutorials has been a huge learning experience for me. I've had to learn and try out a lot of things that I normally wouldn't use or know, just so that I can make tutorials about them. I've heard people say that nothing makes you really *get* something better than to explain it to somebody else. I now know that it's true. 

### The move

Java Brains started its existence on <a href="http://www.blogger.com" target="_blank">Blogger</a>, the free blogging platform by Google. I chose Blogger at the time because it was free *and* flexible. I had written a custom Blogger template that had the look and feel close to the way I wanted it. 

A while back, a colleague of mine introduced me to <a href="http://jekyllrb.com/" target="_blank">Jekyll</a>. Jekyll is a static site generator written in Ruby that takes individual post text files and generates a site or a blog from it. It is extremely customizable and I found it to be a good fit for what I wanted. I have now rebuilt this site to use Jekyll and moved it to <a href="http://pages.github.com/" target="_blank">Github pages</a>. I would definitely encourage you to check them both out if you are interested in blogging. I'm using <a href="http://disqus.com/" target="_blank">Disqus</a> for comments, since I'm moving away from Blogger and its commenting system. But since the site is static now, (it's pre-rendered before deployment) the load time should be super-fast. In fact, you should be able to see how slow the YouTube video widget loads compared to the rest of the site! 

### The vision

I envisoned a few things in my mind about the web site that led to this change. This has only been partly achieved at this time. But here's the plan anyway.

**1. Adding readability**

Java Brains today is 99% videos. One common feedback I've received is of people wishing they could read some of the material on the site. Some might need to use the site at work where they cannot play or listen to YouTube videos. Writing transcripts does take time and needs a fundamental change in the way I produce videos. At this point, I honestly don't know if it'll work. But I see the value in it, and I'm willing to try, at least in the tutorials I produce from now on. I'd also like to hear your thoughts about it.

**2. Making the site open source**

I've now licensed Java Brains under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. I know some of you will appreciate this. The code that drives this site, including this very blog post, is now available <a href="https://github.com/koushikkothagal/javabrains-site" target="_blank">on Github</a>. You are free to use any material on this site for your blog or website, but you'll need to attribute it to the source and provide a link back. Share, dont steal! :)

**3. Enabling contribution**

Over the years, a lot of people have been asking me how they can contribute to this effort.  I used to tell them that the best thing they can do is spread the word. Now, there is one more way! If you are a UI developer, you'll probably take a look at the HTML / CSS code and cringe. Well, feel free to fork the code and enhance it. I would definitely appreciate pull requests on Github. Also, in relation to #1 above, if you'd like to add written material and source code to some of my older videos, you are welcome to. Connect with me <a href="http://www.linkedin.com/in/koushiksrinivas" target="_blank">on LinkedIn</a> if you have any questions on how to contribute.

I intend to write more about my process of publishing. Do let me know in the comments if that would interest you. I have messed around with Jekyll, HTML and CSS enough that I could probably even start even a basic tutorial series on them. HTML Brains, perhaps?!  

Anyhow, looking back, my work with Java Brains has been worth every minute of time and effort I have put into it. I'll share more about it in the hope that it'll encourage you to work on your own blog and start teaching stuff. Well, you know, *just in case it might help someone!*